Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane.
Theodore Sturgeon is one of the finest writers science fiction and fantasy has ever produced.
For 45 years Sturgeon has created imaginative fiction that is noted for its innovative themes
and perfection of style.
A large percentage of his works have become classics in the field.
His novel More Than Human, for example, are the powerful short story Thunder and Roses.
We spoke with Sturgeon recently and asked him to tell us how he became a writer.
I began to write when I was an able seaman in the Virgin Marine.
And how that came about was that I left home before I graduated from high school.
It's a fascinating thing.
I lecture at colleges and universities all over the United States and in England and in
France and I have yet to get my high school diploma.
Someday somebody will grant me an honorary high school diploma.
But anyway, I was on the ship and you had a lot of time to read.
And I conceived the idea of an absolutely foolproof crime that would net me thousands and thousands of dollars.
And I even did research on it.
I was on a coast-wise tanker.
And as I was going up and down the coast, when we stopped at a port, I would send off a letter to the railroad.
So it was one of those things that was involved.
And the insurance companies, that was another in the Post Office, that was still another.
I got all my research done as to how to commit this particular kind of robbery.
And they let it carefully written so that nobody would know what I was up to.
And when I had all my material, I found that I did not have the immoral courage to commit the crime.
So I wrote it as a story.
This was way back in the late 30s.
And I sent my story off to a newspaper syndicate.
I did not know anything about writing particularly.
And they were buying 1500-word short, short stories that they published every day in the syndicate.
And when I got up to New York in the ship, to my amazement, I got a letter of acceptance.
And so I quit the sea and came ashore to be a writer.
And I got my money not on acceptance, but on publication.
And it was five whole dollars.
And they would buy one and sometimes two stories a week, but no more.
And so four and a half months or so, I lived on five and sometimes ten dollars a week.
My room cost me seven.
And whatever I saved, I could eat.
And I learned a lot about being hungry and how to...
Did you ever notice that the counter cake has no crust on the ends?
That's what they do is chop them off and they sell them in their day-old store.
And at that time you could get a whole shopping bag full of cake ends for a nickel.
And I used to live on that.
One time I got a whole shopping bag full and it was moldy, but I ate it anyhow.
And I was so sick I didn't eat for three days, and so I saved myself some money.
You know, like that.
It was a hard school. It really was.
Sturgeon persisted as a writer, though, earning his living writing pulp fiction.
And pulp fiction, we should add, that surpassed almost anything else coming out in the pulp format.
Then Sturgeon met someone who gave his career a big boost.
Then I finally, after some months of that, and I think I went back to sea for a short while,
I finally met John Campbell in 1939, early 1939.
He was the editor of astounding science fiction and a wonderful fantasy magazine called Unknown.
And so I started writing for him, and then after that it just exploded.
One time I had four stories on the stands at the same time, and those two magazines, I had to get two new names.
So it was an interesting beginning.
On our next show we'll continue our conversation with Theodore Sturgeon.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Theodore Sturgeon
Stay with us.
This is The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
Much of Theodore Sturgeon's early science fiction and fantasy was published in the pulp magazines of the 30s and 40s.
Yet Sturgeon is known as one of the finest stylists science fiction has ever produced,
and the pulps were not exactly a seedbed for perfection of style.
When we spoke with Sturgeon we observed that he hardly belongs to the pulp category.
Well you know, this is difficultly with a whole matter of categorization anyway.
We're in the grip of the taxonomist.
And people who put labels on things and stick them into cubby holes.
Taxonomy has its uses. There's no question about that.
You have to be able to find and retrieve information and that's what taxonomy is all about.
But more and more there seems to come over our whole culture,
the idea that if you can put a label on it you understand it.
And that is not what taxonomy is for.
Taxonomy is handles by which you can pick something up and look at it.
But for so many people in so many ways the label is sufficient.
You know, he's a Republican.
His mother was a Jew or, yeah, he's a poet.
He's an ethnic or whatever.
They're all labels and it's a little effort made to understand what's under these labels.
Pulp fictions have suffered from the same thing.
Pulp actually referred to the kind of paper it was printed on, not to its quality.
There was the pulps and there were the slicks.
The slicks from magazines like The Saturday Evening Post and Collier's and The Hone Journal.
Then the pulps were things like black masks and Air Wars stories and science fiction and fantasy and the like.
But it's so easy for the taxonomists and for people who don't pay proper attention to what was going on
to feel that pulp was a qualitative comment and slick was also qualitative.
Slicked paper was better in literature than pulp paper.
Some of the finest writing around is some of the best pulp writers as such.
I mean, the best writers of the time began in pulp and they only gravitated to the slicks,
not because they got better but because they got paid more.
Red Bradbury is a perfect example of that.
So is Dashiell Hammett and the like.
We asked Sturgeon why he devoted himself to science fiction and fantasy.
Why didn't he write regular or mainstream fiction?
Well, first of all because I love the field.
Because it's the only genre which has no limitations whatsoever.
A lot of people there, the taxonomists are into it again.
They feel that science fiction is the literature of the future and of space.
Which is nonsense. It's true that a lot of it is.
But you can write science fiction about the past.
You can write science fiction about that marvelous place called other.
Just another place that doesn't have any reference to where we go in the future.
That's the best kind.
That's the kind that I think one of the things that science fiction is for.
If you don't like the government, go ahead and create a new kind of government.
Give it a push and see how it works.
You can study whole cultures and religions and also literature and art.
I've gone into that in some of my stories.
Which are essentially in places that occur just other.
Not in the future or in the past necessarily.
One of the very finest science fiction books around is by somebody I'm very proud to call one of my ex-students.
It's called Wild Seed. It's by Octavia Butler.
And it begins somewhere around the 17th century and goes up to about 1910.
Which is highly future fiction.
The totally original structure, original idea and beautifully written.
That lady is tremendous. She really is. One of the big ones.
When Sturgeon began publishing his fiction back in the late 30s, science fiction had not yet exploded.
Most of it was still published in pulp magazines rather than books.
The pulp authors were often writers who also wrote westerns, adventure fiction, detectives and so forth.
Sturgeon contributed greatly to the growing popularity of science fiction and indeed helped usher it into its golden age.
We'll talk about such matters on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Music plays
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
Music plays
This is David Carson.
And Daryl Lane.
Theatre Sturgeon has influenced science fiction as few other writers have.
He began publishing science fiction and fantasy in the late 1930s and quickly became recognized as one of the most unique stylists and thinkers in the field.
We asked him if he associated with any other writers in those early days.
Was there any sense of community or fellowship among science fiction writers?
Oh sure. I am characteristically not a joiner as such.
There was a group called the Hydro Club which was completely informal.
And the rule one was that there are no rules for this organization.
And an awful lot of people belong to the Hydro Club.
And through that in the early years I got to know all sorts of people like Horace Golden and Fred Polan, Henry Cutner and so on.
Well, the whole raft with those early writers, I think I knew them all.
And there was a group there, Fred Polan's written about them called the Futurians.
I was never involved in that particularly.
I attended the very first Milford Science Fiction Writers Conference in Milford, New Jersey.
I guess that was in 1951.
And Judith Merrill, I was very close to.
I knew virtually everybody in the field at that time except one or two of the West Coast people.
Back in the 40s, Sturgeon's style and his innovative themes were startingly fresh in a field that was noted for its cliches and formulas.
Science fiction author, critic and historian James Gunn has written that because of Theodore Sturgeon, other writers have been freer to write what they wish to write and were able to find a market for it.
We wondered if Sturgeon were conscious of himself as having that kind of role.
Not at all. Not at all.
I tell you, the last few years have been real revelations to me.
For one thing, I didn't realize that I had had so much personal impact on people until what was it, six years or so.
Now, I went to Italy and a woman came up to me dragging an interpreter and the interpreter said, she doesn't speak any English, but there are two things that she wants to tell you.
One of them is that you write women better than any other writer she knows.
And the other thing is that because of something that you wrote, she did not kill herself one night.
And the woman began to cry and the interpreter began to cry and I began to cry.
And it was quite an experience.
I suddenly realized that what I have done, apparently, I've been able to reach a great many people far deeper than I had any idea that I was doing.
When I look back over the mail that I've gotten over the years, I realize how many people in how many different ways have told me that same kind of thing.
It's extremely gratifying. It's also a little frightening.
I mean, it's frightening enough to make you terrified or touching your typewriter.
Barry Malzberg, another author and critic of science fiction, has called Sturgeon the most important science fiction writer of the 40s.
Malzberg says that because of Sturgeon's style, his internalization or use of psychology in his quirky characters, he opened the door for everything that happened in the 50s.
Sturgeon read Malzberg's assessment. His response is interesting.
Yeah, I'll tell you quickly a story. A few years ago, there was a little boy who went to see his buddy. He was 67 years old.
His mother told him back to be back before dark. And he was so busy playing with his friend that he looked out the window and saw it was dark.
And he went rushing home. And like little kids will, he dragged his stick along a picket fence and when he got to the corner, he whined it against the lamp post.
And immediately all the lights in the northeastern United States went out. Remember that one? That big blackout?
He went rushing home to his mother, weeping and threw himself into her arms.
And said, God, mommy, I didn't mean it. I didn't mean it. But this is the way I felt when I first read things like this.
More with Theodore Sturgeon next time.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
Theodore Sturgeon is known as one of the finest short story writers who has ever written science fiction and fantasy.
But he's also published novels. One of them, More Than Human, is a genuine science fiction classic.
It came out in 1953 and won the International Fantasy Award in 1954.
More Than Human is really three interconnected stories dealing with extra sensory powers.
It depicts Sturgeon's impressionistic style, the coming together of six freaks, children who have latent side powers, but who are lost and ineffectual when they are alone.
But as a group, a gestalt that functions as a single organism, they succeed and become symbolic of a new level of human maturity.
Sturgeon talks about More Than Human.
The springboard for that was in a book by Pearl Buck, which was called The Vision of Women.
I read it so many years ago that I hardly remember the book at all.
But there was one passage in there which described a monk who took care of some children in a cave in the woods.
And they were uneducated and wild children that have died without him.
And he was just an impoverished monk himself, and he took care of these raggedy little children.
That image always stayed with me.
And somehow that and the whole idea of what would happen if each of these children, coming from various places and being various kinds of children, had very special ESP talents.
And again, it was a question of investigating what the impact would be on the world as a whole, as some of the newly recognized activities of the human mind came up.
And this, of course, is, there are literally thousands of books that have been written on that theme since then.
Sturgeon says the book has been his most popular among readers.
When I sold Finnish and Israeli rights two years ago, it got into its 15th and 16th languages.
And just how many editions I have, no idea, genuinely not.
I know there are five or six English editions and several Spanish and a number of French and four Japanese editions.
And I think I'm proudest of all of that if a novel can pass the language barrier and the cultural barrier and go into more editions.
And I think that's a real achievement.
Another Sturgeon novel is Venus Plus X, the book's strong on ideas.
And the main idea is sexual stereotyping in our society, the seemingly predetermined roles men and women must take on.
Sturgeon talks about the impetus behind Venus Plus X.
That came about by I was leafing through a magazine and I saw an ad for a Volting's tire chain, weed tire chains.
And there was a photograph of a girl in her underwear holding out a tire chain.
And it stopped me calling. I said, what on earth has that got to do with a tire chain?
Clearly, you know, it was a, it was a grabber by the advertising business that made you stop and look at the ad.
But what has the girl with the clothes I've got to do with a tire chain?
And I began to think, what kind of a civilization, what would it be like to live in a culture where there was no, there's no particular sexual bias at all?
And so I started, first of all, creating a society in which there was no sexual at all.
That people were, they generated like oysters, which can be both either male or female.
But at the beginning, they're neither. And I couldn't make that work.
So I went in another direction and created a race of people and each individual was both sexes.
And therefore there was no sexual differentiation. They were just people.
And it got into their love and marriage, their sexuality, also into their art, their literature, their architecture.
And so, and I had a ball with that. Venus plus sex is not, you know, really a novel at all. It's a, it's a tractor.
It's an exposition of the ideas that I was getting at the time.
We'll continue our conversation with Theodore Sturgeon next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is The Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane, Science Fiction author Theodore Sturgeon as justly famous as an innovator.
His innovations have come in various areas, but perhaps the most important is his introduction into the science fiction of themes that had never before been treated by the genre.
Right. Taboo themes such as homosexuality and incest, among others.
We ask Sturgeon if he deliberately shattered taboos.
Yes, I have purposely broken taboos. And you know, I wrote the first stories in science fiction about homosexuality, for example, which dealt with homosexuality and with incest.
And I had a three-prouder in omnie last year which dealt with cannibalism.
But these stories were not about homosexuality and about incest and about cannibalism.
And essentially they were about confrontation. All my life I've been infuriated by people who shuck away from an idea.
I don't want to hear about that. Oh, don't tell me that. I don't want to hear it. You know, that always angers me.
Because only by confrontation can we really learn anything.
The whole history of, well, a subject like masturbation, for example, which absolutely terrified the three or four generations before mine,
and preoccupied them too. The inventor of one of our more famous breakfast foods, he was a nutritional doctor.
And he used to write in the Dietary and Medical Advice books for the home.
And about 75% of them has to do with masturbation.
And now it will make your hair fall out and give you a softening of the brain and tuberculosis and cancer and all kinds of things.
Nowadays, with a little confrontation and a little research and study, you can read in the highest level of women's magazines,
not only how to do it, but how to do it well. And it's become a totally accepted practice.
But the horror that went on, because people would not confront it, would not find out what the truth was, caused so much frightful damage.
I mean, people committed suicide over that. I had a relative whose whole life was absolutely made hell by his preoccupation with that.
To be tempted and finally to yield and then feel guilty and feel guilty and so guilty that he would never tell anybody about it, it wrecked his whole life.
Now people have got to confront.
Sturgeon has confronted many controversial or painful ideas in his novels and short stories.
He continues to tell us why he does so.
So often people ask the next question, the one that follows and the one that follows until they suddenly come to a question.
They don't want to ask because they're afraid they might get the answer.
And there they stop. And then when you stop asking the next question, you die. You become a zombie.
And join the ranks of the zombies you see marching around you where you've stopped asking the next question.
It's a very symbol of life and of progress and of science and everything toward basic truth.
When you ever reach basic truth, you'll find not a thing or a precept, but you'll find a process.
You'll find something going on.
And this is the way I've been thinking apparently all my life.
I get very, very irritated when I find that people refuse to think beyond a certain point.
There's a bumper sticker that goes around in the Bible Belt. God said it. I believe it. That settles it.
When you see a bumper sticker like that, you just heard the crash of a closing mind.
There's plenty of room out there to confront the whole idea of God and to go on with it.
And that's the next question and the question that follows without committing any particular kind of sin.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.